docs: add full bootstrapping guide (#40)
talos-systems/sidero: docs/website/content/docs/bootstrapping.md

sidebar: "docs"
prev: "/docs/installation/"
next: "/docs/patching/"
---

# Bootstrapping

## Introduction

Imagine a scenario in which you have shown up to a datacenter with only a laptop and your task is to transition a rack of bare metal machines into an HA management plane and multiple Kubernetes clusters created by that management plane.
In this guide, we will go through how to create a bootstrap cluster using a Docker-based Talos cluster, provision the management plane, and pivot over to it.
Guides around post-pivoting setup and subsequent cluster creation should also be found in the "Guides" section of the sidebar.

Because of the design of Cluster API, there is inherently a "chicken and egg" problem with needing a Kubernetes cluster in order to provision the management plane.
Talos Systems and the Cluster API community have created tools to help make this transition easier.

## Prerequisites

There are two big prerequisites involved with bootstrapping Sidero: routing and DHCP setup.

From the routing side, the laptop from which you are bootstrapping *must* be accessible by the bare metal machines that we will be booting.

> In the datacenter scenario described above, the easiest way to achieve this is probably to hook the lapop onto the server rack's subnet by plugging it into the top-of-rack switch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the datacenter scenario described above, the easiest way to achieve this is probably to hook the laptop onto the server rack's subnet by plugging it into the top-of-rack switch.
```

> This is needed for TFTP, PXE booting, and the ability of the metal machines to register themselves with the bootstrap plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is needed for TFTP, PXE booting, and for the ability to register machines with the bootstrap plane.
```

DHCP configuration is needed to tell the metal servers what their "next server" is when PXE booting.
The configuration of this is different for each environment and each DHCP server, thus it's impossible to give an easy guide.

> However, here is an example of the configuration from my EdgeRouter that uses vyatta-dhcpd as the DHCP service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, here is an example of the configuration for an Ubiquti EdgeRouter that uses vyatta-dhcpd as the DHCP service:
```

This block shows the subnet setup, as well as the extra "subnet-parameters" that tell the DHCP server to include the ipxe-metal.conf file.

```bash
$ show service dhcp-server shared-network-name MetalDHCP

 authoritative enable
 subnet 192.168.254.0/24 {
     default-router 192.168.254.1
     dns-server 192.168.1.200
     lease 86400
     start 192.168.254.2 {
         stop 192.168.254.252
     }
     subnet-parameters "include &quot;/etc/dhcp/ipxe-metal.conf&quot;;"
 }
```

> And this is my ipxe-metal.conf file.
> Notice that it sets a static address for the management node that I'll be booting, in addition to providing the "next server" info.
> This "next server" IP address will match references to `PUBLIC_IP` found below in this guide.
> 
> ```bash
> $ cat /etc/dhcp/ipxe-metal.conf
> 
> allow bootp;
> allow booting;
> 
> group "management-plane" {
>   next-server 192.168.1.150;
>   if exists user-class and option user-class = "iPXE" {
>     filename "http://192.168.1.150:8081/boot.ipxe";
>   } else {
>     filename "ipxe.efi";
>   }
> 
>   host talos-mgmt-0 {
>      fixed-address 192.168.254.2;
>      hardware ethernet d0:50:99:d3:33:60;
>   }
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the ipxe-metal.conf file:

```bash
$ cat /etc/dhcp/ipxe-metal.conf

allow bootp;
allow booting;

group "management-plane" {
  next-server 192.168.1.150;
  if exists user-class and option user-class = "iPXE" {
    filename "http://192.168.1.150:8081/boot.ipxe";
  } else {
    filename "ipxe.efi";
  }

  host talos-mgmt-0 {
     fixed-address 192.168.254.2;
     hardware ethernet d0:50:99:d3:33:60;
  }
}
```

Notice that it sets a static address for the management node that we'll be booting, in addition to providing the "next server" option.
This "next server" IP address will match references to `PUBLIC_IP` found below in this guide.
```

Reviewer: GitHub is messing up the format, but I think you get the picture. Just minor reordering.

## Create a Local Cluster

The `talosctl` CLI tool has built-in support for spinning up Talos in docker containers.
Let's use this to our advantage as an easy Kubernetes cluster to start from.

Set an environment variable called `PUBLIC_IP` which is the "public" IP of your machine.
Note that "public" is a bit of a misnomer.
We're really looking for the IP of your machine, not the IP of the node on the docker bridge (ex: `192.168.1.150`).

```bash
export PUBLIC_IP="192.168.1.150"
```

We can now create our Docker cluster.
Issue the following to create a single-node cluster:

```bash
talosctl cluster create \
  -p 69:69/udp,8081:8081/tcp,9091:9091/tcp,50100:50100/tcp \
  --workers 0 \
  --endpoint $PUBLIC_IP
```

Note that there are several ports mentioned in the command above.

> These allow use to access the services that will get deployed on this node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These allow us to access the services that will get deployed on this node.
```

Once the cluster create command is complete, issue `talosctl kubeconfig /desired/path` to fetch the kubeconfig for this cluster.
You should then set your `KUBECONFIG` environment variable to the path of this file.

## Untaint Control Plane

Because this is a single node cluster, we need to remove the "NoSchedule" taint on the node to make sure non-controlplane components can be scheduled.

```bash
kubectl taint node talos-default-master-1 node-role.kubernetes.io/master:NoSchedule-
```

## Install Sidero

As of Cluster API version 0.3.9, Sidero is included as a default infrastructure provider in clusterctl.

To install Sidero and the other Talos providers, simply issue:

```bash
clusterctl init -b talos -c talos -i sidero
```

## Patch Components

> We will now want to ensure that the Sidero services that got created are publicly accessible across our subnet. This will allow the metal machines to speak to these services later.

Reviewer: We don't have one-sentence-per-line linter yet, but it would have hit you here :smile: 
```suggestion
We will now want to ensure that the Sidero services that got created are publicly accessible across our subnet.
This will allow the metal machines to speak to these services later.
```

Author: dang, thought I was doing so good on one sentence per line lol

Reviewer: Lol yeah I saw that :smile:

> At this point, any servers on the same networkd as Sidero should PXE boot using the Sidero PXE service.

Reviewer 2: from my testing it looks like servers are registered as soon as we boot Sidero components (before default environment is created)

Author: Yeah, that's true. it's not strictly required to precreate the default environment. I can move the ordering of those two steps.

```

## Create Management Plane

We are now ready to template out our management plane.
Using clusterctl, we can create a cluster manifest with:

```bash
clusterctl config cluster management-plane -i sidero > management-plane.yaml
```

Note that there are several variables that should be set in order for the templating to work properly:

- CONTROL_PLANE_ENDPOINT
- CONTROL_PLANE_SERVERCLASS
- WORKER_SERVERCLASS
- KUBERNETES_VERSION

Now that we have the manifest, we can simply apply it:

```bash
kubectl apply -f management-plane.yaml
```

Once the management plane is setup, you can fetch the talosconfig with a command like:

```bash
kubectl get talosconfig -o yaml management-plane-cp-xxx -o jsonpath='{.status.talosConfig}' > management-plane-talosconfig.yaml
```

Then the management plane's kubeconfig can be fetched with `talosctl --talosconfig management-plane-talosconfig.yaml kubeconfig /desired/path`

## Pivoting

Once we have the kubeconfig for the management cluster, we now have the ability to pivot the cluster from our bootstrap.
Using clusterctl, issue:

```bash
  clusterctl move --to-kubeconfig=/path/to/management-plane/kubeconfig
```

> Upon completion of this command, we can now tear down our bootstrap cluster with `talosctl cluster destroy` and begin using our management plane as our point of creation for all future clusters!

Reviewer 2: should we patch Sidero components in the management cluster for new API endpoint and stuff like that?

do we need to re-setup DHCP/TFTP, as endpoints got changed?

Author: Yep, those will be coming in a "post-pivot"/"creating your first cluster" guide that follows this one.
